Add/update some information about threads and CPU groups, and tiered compilation events (#37149)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-tiered-compilation-events.md

Reviewer: This file should be added to the TOC somewhere around here: https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/c6558d385a218995de75397ca5a7f75042984f83/docs/navigate/tools-diagnostics/toc.yml#L388

---
title: "Tiered compilation runtime events"

> description: See .NET runtime tiered compilation events that collect diagnostic information about tiered compilation in .NET Core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about the .NET runtime tiered compilation events that collect diagnostic information about tiered compilation in .NET.
```

Author: Made a similar change in a few other files.

ms.date: "9/15/2023"
ms.topic: reference
helpviewer_keywords:
  - "Tiered compilation events (CoreCLR)"
  - "ETW, tiered compilation events (CoreCLR)"
---
# .NET runtime tiered compilation events

> These events collect information about tiered compilation. For more information about how to use these events for diagnostic purposes, see [logging and tracing .NET applications](../../core/diagnostics/logging-tracing.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The events described in this article collect information about tiered compilation. For more information about how to use these events for diagnostic purposes, see [logging and tracing .NET applications](../../core/diagnostics/logging-tracing.md)
```

Author: Made a similar change in a few other files.

|Event|Event ID|Raised when|
|-|-|-|
|`TieredCompilationSettings`|280|Provides information about tiered compilation settings.|

The following table shows the event data.

|Field name|Data type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`ClrInstanceID`|`win:UInt16`|Unique ID for the instance of CoreCLR.|
|`Flags`|`win:UInt32`|Flags that indicate various settings. Multiple flags may be provided with bitwise-OR, and a value of `0x0` indicates that no flags were provided.<br/><br/>`0x1` - Quick JIT is enabled. If a method does not have precompiled code, for the first tier it will be JIT-compiled quickly but with fewer optimizations.<br/><br/>`0x2` - Quick JIT is enabled for methods containing loops.<br/><br/>`0x4` - Tiered PGO is enabled. Methods may be profiled before they are optimized.<br/><br/>`0x8` - ReadyToRun is enabled. Methods that have precompiled ReadyToRun code will use that for the first tier.|

## TieredCompilationPause event

The following table shows the keyword and level.

|Keyword for raising the event|Level|
|-|-|
|`CompilationKeyword` (0x1000000000)|Informational (4)|

The following table shows the event information.

|Event|Event ID|Raised when|
|-|-|-|

> |`TieredCompilationPause`|281|Tiered compilation was paused. Tiered compilation may be paused due to startup-like activities such as a new method being called for the first time, to reduce overhead during application startup, such as call-counting and background JIT-compilation. It would resume after startup-like activities cease for a short duration.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`TieredCompilationPause`|281|Tiered compilation was paused. Tiered compilation may be paused due to startup-like activities, such as a new method being called for the first time, to reduce overhead during application startup, such as call-counting and background JIT-compilation. It resumes after startup-like activities cease for a short duration.|
```

The following table shows the event data.

|Field name|Data type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`ClrInstanceID`|`win:UInt16`|Unique ID for the instance of CoreCLR.|

## TieredCompilationResume event

The following table shows the keyword and level.

|Keyword for raising the event|Level|
|-|-|
|`CompilationKeyword` (0x1000000000)|Informational (4)|

The following table shows the event information.

|Event|Event ID|Raised when|
|-|-|-|
|`TieredCompilationResume`|282|Tiered compilation was resumed.|

The following table shows the event data.

|Field name|Data type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`ClrInstanceID`|`win:UInt16`|Unique ID for the instance of CoreCLR.|
|`NewMethodCount`|`win:UInt32`|The number of new methods called for the first time while tiered compilation was paused.|

## TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStart event

The following table shows the keyword and level.

|Keyword for raising the event|Level|
|-|-|

> |`CompilationKeyword` (0x1000000000)|Informational (4)|

Reviewer: Is this the same for all the events? Should we just list it once at the beginning of the article?

Author: The info here is the same for all of the events in this article, though there are differences between events in other cases. Also typically, a user would look in the docs for a particular event and it would be easier to follow if all of the relevant information about the event is in one place.

The following table shows the event information.

|Event|Event ID|Raised when|
|-|-|-|
|`TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStart`|283|Background JIT-compilation has started.|

The following table shows the event data.

|Field name|Data type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`ClrInstanceID`|`win:UInt16`|Unique ID for the instance of CoreCLR.|
|`PendingMethodCount`|`win:UInt32`|The number of methods pending background JIT-compilation.|

## TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStop event

The following table shows the keyword and level.

|Keyword for raising the event|Level|
|-|-|
|`CompilationKeyword` (0x1000000000)|Informational (4)|

The following table shows the event information.

|Event|Event ID|Raised when|
|-|-|-|
|`TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStop`|284|Background JIT-compilation has stopped.|

The following table shows the event data.

|Field name|Data type|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`ClrInstanceID`|`win:UInt16`|Unique ID for the instance of CoreCLR.|
|`PendingMethodCount`|`win:UInt32`|The number of methods still pending background JIT-compilation.|

> |`JittedMethodCount`|`win:UInt32`|The number of methods that were JIT-compiled in the background since background JIT-compilation had last started.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`JittedMethodCount`|`win:UInt32`|The number of methods that were JIT-compiled in the background since background JIT-compilation last started.|
```
